[Block Storage]: data migration tutorial (#2755)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/migrate-block-storage-data-to-block-low-latency/index.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Migrating Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency

>   description: This page shows you how to migrate Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: This page shows you how to migrate Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency volume
```

content:
  h1: Migrating Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency

>   paragraph: This page shows you how to migrate Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  paragraph: This page shows you how to migrate Block Storage data to Block Storage Low Latency volume
```

categories:
  - instances
  - block-storage
tags: block-storage data migration block-storage-low-latency
dates:
  validation: 2024-02-15
  posted: 2024-02-15
---

> This tutorial shows you how to migrate your Instance's data from a Block Storage volume (b_ssd) to a Block Storage Low Latency according to your needs and level of expertise. You will find out how to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows you how to migrate your Instance's data from an existing Block Storage volume (b_ssd) to a Block Storage Low Latency volume. You will find out how to:
```

- prepare for migration
- identify your volumes
- identify which migration procedure to use, according to how your volumes are mounted
- migrate your data without Logical Volume Management or Partition Table
- migrate your data using **Logical Volume Management (LVM)**
- migrate your data with Partition Table but without Logical Volume Management

> Note that your Operating System and the volume on which you have stored it, **cannot be migrated to a Block Storage Low Latency volume**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that your operating system and the volume on which you have stored it, **cannot be migrated to a Block Storage Low Latency volume**.
```

> <Macro id="iam-requirements" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Macro id="requirements" />
```

> <Message type="requirement">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>   - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
```

  - You have [created an SSH key](/console/project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have [created an Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance/) and [attached a Block SSD volume](/storage/block/how-to/attach-a-volume/) to it, containing data to migrate
  - Your Instance's OS is **not hosted on the Block SSD volume that contains the data you want to migrate**

> </Message>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

       version: v42
       size: 9536MiB (10GB)
       capabilities: 5400rpm gpt-1.00 partitioned partitioned:gpt
       configuration: ansiversion=5 guid=d6b69d71-c8d0-4566-9551-6cf4ecc589e3 logicalsectorsize=512 sectorsize=4096
    *-disk:1
       description: SCSI Disk
       product: b_ssd
       vendor: SCW
       physical id: 0.1.0
       bus info: scsi@2:0.1.0
       logical name: /dev/sdb
       version: v42
       size: 23GiB (25GB)
       capabilities: 5400rpm
       configuration: ansiversion=5 logicalsectorsize=512 sectorsize=4096
    *-disk:2
       description: SCSI Disk
       product: b_ssd
       vendor: SCW
       physical id: 0.2.0
       bus info: scsi@2:0.2.0
       logical name: /dev/sdc
       version: v42
       size: 23GiB (25GB)
       capabilities: 5400rpm
       configuration: ansiversion=5 logicalsectorsize=512 sectorsize=4096
    *-disk:3
       description: SCSI Disk
       product: b_ssd
       vendor: SCW
       physical id: 0.2.0
       bus info: scsi@2:0.2.0
       logical name: /dev/sdd
       version: v42
       size: 23GiB (25GB)
       capabilities: 5400rpm
       configuration: ansiversion=5 logicalsectorsize=512 sectorsize=4096

> 

Author: Need to add ``` here

3. Run the following command to retrieve your volumes' Scaleway IDs:

    ```
    ls -la /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW* -la
    ```
   An output similar to the following displays:

   ```
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-3a9f7296-637b-4e12-9f9f-306e3031d064 -> ../../sdb
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-715131d8-60fe-4707-b199-71d0e005d76d -> ../../sdc
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-7e1a9b98-b7ee-4bbc-8f8f-a7abbfffc937 -> ../../sda
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-7e1a9b98-b7ee-4bbc-8f8f-a7abbfffc937-part1 -> ../../sda1
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 11 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-7e1a9b98-b7ee-4bbc-8f8f-a7abbfffc937-part14 -> ../../sda14
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 11 Feb  7 16:25 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-0SCW_b_ssd_volume-7e1a9b98-b7ee-4bbc-8f8f-a7abbfffc937-part15 -> ../../sda15
    ```
4. On the Scaleway console, click the <Icon name="more" /> icon next to your Instance's volume, then click **More info**. A pop-up displays with the volume's information.

> 5. Check that for each volume, the ID displayed in the pop-up matches the one returned in the output in step 3. For example, the `/dev/sda` volume's ID on the console, matches the one returned in the output.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Check that for each volume, the ID displayed in the pop-up matches the one returned in the output in step 3. For example, the `/dev/sda` volume's ID on the console, should match the one returned in the output.
```

    <Lightbox src="scaleway-volume-info.webp" alt="" />

6. Optionally, compile a table with your volumes with the logical name, size in GB, and ID for each volume.

| Logical name | Size in GB | ID                                   |
|--------------|------------|--------------------------------------|
| /dev/sda     | 10         | 7e1a9b98-b7ee-4bbc-8f8f-a7abbfffc937 |
| /dev/sdb     | 25         | 3a9f7296-637b-4e12-9f9f-306e3031d064 |
| /dev/sdc     | 25         | 715131d8-60fe-4707-b199-71d0e005d76d |

### Identifying which migration procedure to use

1. Run the following command to check if your volumes are managed by LVM:

    ```
    pvs
    ```

>     If an output similar to the following displays, with your source volume under the `PV`section, we recommend that you migrate your data using the [Migrating data with Logical Volume Management (LVM) procedure](#migrating-data-with-logical-volume-management-(lvm)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If an output similar to the following displays, with your source volume under the `PV` section, we recommend that you migrate your data using the [Migrating data with Logical Volume Management (LVM) procedure](#migrating-data-with-logical-volume-management-(lvm)).
```

    /dev/sdc /srv/docker ext2 rw,relatime,stripe=1024 0 0
    /dev/sde1 /srv/docker ext2 rw,relatime,stripe=1024 0 0
    ```

For the sake of this tutorial, we have created different volumes according to the migration procedures available, to help you choose the migration procedure you should use:

In the output, we can observe that:

- the root system `/` is mounted using `/dev/sda1`, as `/dev/sda` is the System volume. As stated previously in this documentation, data contained in this volume must not be migrated.
- `/dev/sdc` is mounted as a non-partitioned raw device, since there is no number appended to the device path. For this use case, you must migrate your data using the [Migrating data without Partition Table or LVM procedure](#migrating-data-without-partition-table-or-lvm).
- `/dev/sde1` is a partitioned raw device. The naming convention used for it (sde1) is typical for identifying partitions on storage devices. For this use case, one must migrate their data using the [Migrating data without LVM but with Partition Table procedure](#migrating-data-without-lvm-but-with-partition-table).

> ## Migrating data without Partition Table or LVM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating data without partition table or LVM
```

        ```

6. Use the following command to move your data from your source volume to your target volume:
        ```
        # Move your data from /dev/sdb to /dev/sdc
        pvmove -b /dev/sdb /dev/sdc
        ```
7. Use the following command to monitor the data migration process:
        ```
        watch lvs -a -o+devices
        ```
8. Once the migration is complete, run the following command to remove your source volume from your volume group. This means your volume group will no longer consider your source volume as part of its storage pool.
        ```
        vgreduce my_volume_group /dev/sdb
        ```
9. Use the following command to remove the physical volume from your source volume:
        ```
        # Remove all LVM-related metadata from your source volume
        pvremove /dev/sdb
        ```
10. Restart your applications/services, and check that they are running.
11. Reboot your Instance and check that your applications are running correctly.
12. Optionally, wait a few days and [delete the SSD volume](/storage/block/how-to/delete-a-volume/) using the Scaleway console.

## Migrating data without LVM but with Partition Table

<Message type="important">

>   To follow this procedure you must have:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  To follow this procedure, you must have:
```

  - [created a Block Storage Low Latency volume](/storage/block/how-to/create-a-volume/)
  - [attached your volumes to your Instance](/storage/block/how-to/attach-a-volume/)
  - created partitions on your source and target volumes
  - [formatted your partitions](/storage/block/api-cli/managing-a-volume/#formatting-the-block-volume) using the ext4 filesystem
  - [mounted your Block SSD volume](/storage/block/api-cli/managing-a-volume/#mounting-the-block-volume) on your Instance
</Message>

1. Open a terminal and connect to your Instance using SSH:
    ```
    ssh root@<Your Instance's IP>
    ```
2. Use the following command to make a copy of your Instance's `fstab` file:
    ```
    # This command creates an exact copy of the /etc/fstab file named fstab.backup

    cp -a /etc/fstab /etc/fstab.backup
    ```
3. Stop any applications and/or services that may be accessing the data on the source volume.
4. Unmount your Block SSD volume:
    ```

>     umount /dev/sdb

Author: ```suggestion
    umount /dev/sdb1
```
